---
title: "The R Experience"
layout: post
subtitle: Writing assignment for ST558 - Data Science for Statisticians 
tags: [R, RStudio, learningR, python, ide, packages]
bigimg: /blog/addons/2020-05-28-ST558_Blog_2/mosy.jfif
---

## Prompt:

> Everyone in the R for Data Science course had some programming experience coming in (due to the prerequisites).  What are your thoughts on R vs whatever other software you've used?  What functionality do you like about R?  What parts do you miss about your other language?  Do you consider R a difficult language to learn? (If you knew R prior to the course, describe your experience when first learning it.)


In my experience the most similar to R and RStudio software experience I have had was *Python* using the *Spyder* IDE. I came into knowing R and RStudio, henceforth they will be referred to as **R+**, by learning how to harness the Tidyverse suite of packages. When I reflect on my learning experience of data manipulation and modeling in Python, **R+** felt intuitive when applying programatic solutions. Though, the Tidyverse glazes over the technical details of R under the hood. Therefore, in regards to the technical details of **R+** I am reminded of SAS. It is worth mentioning how freeing **R+** is comapred to SAS in regards to having full control over statistical methods in a programmatic way that is robust to the wide scope of statistical methodology. Looking at the big picture, I am glad I started with the tidyverse as it made the technical details of **R+** stickier, and it has even helped me learn SQL.

The capability of python to be versatile in technology stacks has always been appealing. Luckily the `reticulate` package makes integrating python snippets of code a relatively straightforward process. This functionality of **R+** adds immense value to being able to program in it. The value added justifies the learning curve that exists with **R+**. In particular, without knowledge of the Tidyverse **R+** can be frustrating to pick up. In the first few weeks of learning **R+** I did not know about tidy data or the suite of packages by Hadley Wickham. The nomenclature of objects, function arguments, and subsetting operations posed a steep learning curve at first. I would recommend anyone learning **R+** today to start with the Tidyverse, then move into base concepts as they grow comfortable with **R+**. 
